docs/keycloak-migration/migration-examples/saml.rst, before:

.. SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023-2024 Univention GmbH
..
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: AGPL-3.0-only

.. _migration-example-saml:

Services using SAML
===================

The following examples demonstrate the migration of services that use |SAML|
for authentication and :program:`SimpleSAMLphp` as |IDP| to :program:`Keycloak`
as |IDP|.

.. _portal-migration:

UCS Portal
----------

You can configure the UCS Portal to use |SAML| for authentication. For a
detailed description of how to configure the UCS Portal to use
:program:`Keycloak` as a :term:`SAML IDP`, refer to
:external+uv-keycloak-app:ref:`login-portal` in the :cite:t:`ucs-keycloak-doc`.

.. _migration-nextcloud:

Nextcloud
---------

This section is about migrating the :program:`Nextcloud` app to use
:program:`Keycloak` as :term:`SAML IDP` for the |SAML| authentication. It
assumes that your environment meets the following requirements:

* The configuration of the app :program:`Nextcloud` is complete and done.

* The |SAML| sign-in for :program:`Nextcloud` works with
  :program:`SimpleSAMLphp` as :term:`SAML IDP`.

* The UCS domain has the latest version of the app :program:`Keycloak`
  installed.

To setup :program:`Nextcloud` for |SAML| with :program:`Keycloak`, use the
following steps:

#. To create a SAML client for :program:`Nextcloud`, run the following commands
   on the UCS system that has the :program:`Keycloak` app installed. Replace
   :samp:`{NEXTCLOUD_FQDN}` with the |FQDN| of the UCS system that has
   :program:`Nextcloud` installed.

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Create SAML client for *Nextcloud* in *Keycloak*
      :name: migration-nextcloud-create-saml-client

      $ NEXTCLOUD_FQDN="REPLACE with NEXTCLOUD_FQDN"
      $ univention-keycloak saml/sp create \
        --metadata-url="https://$NEXTCLOUD_FQDN/nextcloud/apps/user_saml/saml/metadata" \
        --role-mapping-single-value

#. To obtain the :program:`Keycloak` base URL and certificate, run
   the following commands on the UCS system that has :program:`Keycloak`
   installed:

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Retrieve public certificate of *Keycloak*
      :name: migration-nextcloud-get-keycloak-certificate

      $ univention-keycloak saml/idp/cert get \
         --as-pem \
         --output "/tmp/keycloak.cert"

   The output of the command in
   :numref:`migration-nextcloud-get-keycloak-certificate` saves the certificate
   in the file :file:`/tmp/keycloak.cert`. Copy this file to the UCS system that
   has the :program:`Nextcloud` app installed.

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Retrieve public certificate and *Keycloak* base URL
      :name: migration-nextcloud-get-keycloak-base-url

      $ univention-keycloak get-keycloak-base-url

   The command in :numref:`migration-nextcloud-get-keycloak-base-url` outputs
   the base URL of your :program:`Keycloak` server. Replace :samp:`{SSO_URL}` in
   the following instruction with this value.

#. To change the |IDP| settings for :program:`Nextcloud`, run the following
   commands on the UCS system that has it installed. Copy the certificate file
   :file:`/tmp/keycloak.cert` from
   :numref:`migration-nextcloud-get-keycloak-certificate` to the UCS system with
   :program:`Nextcloud` installed and replace :samp:`{SSO_URL}`.

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Configure the :program:`Nextcloud` app to use :program:`Keycloak` as |IDP|
      :name: migration-nextcloud-saml-settings

      $ SSO_URL="REPLACE WITH SSO_URL"
      $ univention-app shell nextcloud sudo -u www-data /var/www/html/occ saml:config:set \
        --idp-x509cert="$(cat /tmp/keycloak.cert)" \
        --general-uid_mapping="uid" \
        --idp-singleLogoutService.url="$SSO_URL/realms/ucs/protocol/saml" \
        --idp-singleSignOnService.url="$SSO_URL/realms/ucs/protocol/saml" \
        --idp-entityId="$SSO_URL/realms/ucs" 1

To validate the setup, visit the sign-in page of your :program:`Nextcloud`
app and initiate a single sign-on. :program:`Nextcloud` redirects you to
:program:`Keycloak` for authentication. You can use :program:`Nextcloud` after
authentication.

.. seealso::

   `Nextcloud <https://www.univention.com/products/univention-app-center/app-catalog/nextcloud/>`_
      in Univention App Catalog

.. _migration-google-connector:

Google Workspace Connector
--------------------------

This section provides a step-by-step guide for migrating the :program:`Google
Connector` app to use :program:`Keycloak` as :term:`SAML IDP`. The migration
assumes that your environment meets the following requirements:

* The configuration of the app :program:`Google Workspace Connector` is complete
  and done.

* The |SAML| login for your *Google Workspace* works with
  :program:`SimpleSAMLphp`.

* You have the administrator credentials for your *Google Workspace Admin Console* for
  the |SAML| service configuration.

* The UCS domain has the latest version of the app :program:`Keycloak`
  installed.

To setup :program:`Google Workspace Connector` for |SAML| with
:program:`Keycloak` use the following steps:

#. Create a :term:`SAML SP`, the client, for :program:`Google Workspace
   Connector` in :program:`Keycloak`. Run the following commands on the UCS
   system that has :program:`Keycloak` installed:

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Create SAML client for *Google Workspace Connector* in *Keycloak*
      :name: migration-google-connector-create-saml-sp

      $ google_domain="REPLACE_WITH_NAME_OF_YOUR_GOOGLE_DOMAIN"
      $ univention-keycloak saml/sp create \
          --client-id google.com \
          --assertion-consumer-url-post "https://www.google.com/a/$google_domain/acs" \
          --single-logout-service-url-post "https://www.google.com/a/$google_domain/acs" \
          --idp-initiated-sso-url-name google.com \
          --name-id-format email \
          --frontchannel-logout-off
      $ univention-keycloak user-attribute-ldap-mapper \
        create univentionGoogleAppsPrimaryEmail
      $ univention-keycloak saml-client-nameid-mapper create \
        google.com \
        univentionGoogleAppsPrimaryEmail \
        --user-attribute univentionGoogleAppsPrimaryEmail \
        --mapper-nameid-format urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:1.1:nameid-format:emailAddress

#. For the configuration of the |SAML| settings of your *Google Workspace* you
   need the public certificate and the base URL of the :program:`Keycloak`
   server. Run the following commands on the UCS system that has
   :program:`Keycloak` installed:

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Retrieve public certificate and *Keycloak* base URL
      :name: migration-google-connector-keycloak-certificate

      $ univention-keycloak saml/idp/cert get --as-pem --output /tmp/keycloak.cert

   The output of the command in
   :numref:`migration-google-connector-keycloak-certificate` is the certificate.
   Copy the file :file:`/tmp/keycloak.cert` to your local client computer.

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Retrieve public certificate and *Keycloak* base URL
      :name: migration-google-connector-keycloak-base-url

      $ univention-keycloak get-keycloak-base-url

   The command in :numref:`migration-google-connector-keycloak-base-url` outputs
   the base URL of your :program:`Keycloak` server. Replace :samp:`{SSO_URL}` in
   the following instruction with this value.

#. Change the *Third-party SSO profile for your organisation* settings in the
   *Google Workspace Admin console* of your google domain.

   #. Open the URL https://admin.google.com and login with your administrator
      account.

   #. Go to :menuselection:`Security --> Authentication --> SSO with third-party IdP`.

   #. Open *Third-party SSO profile for your organisation*.

   #. Change *Sign-in page URL* to ``SSO_URL/realms/ucs/protocol/saml``.

   #. Change *Sign-out page URL* to ``SSO_URL/realms/ucs/protocol/openid-connect/logout``.

   #. To upload the :program:`Keycloak` certificate in :file:`/tmp/kc.cert`
      from :numref:`migration-google-connector-keycloak-certificate`, click
      :guilabel:`REPLACE CERTIFICATE`.

   #. To activate the settings, click :guilabel:`Save`.

#. Change the link in the UCS portal entry *Google Workspace login* for the
   |IDP| initiated single sign-on. On your UCS *Primary Directory Node* run the
   following commands:

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Change portal entry for *Google Workspace login* to |IDP| initiated single sign-on
      :name: migration-google-connector-portal-entry

      $ google_domain="REPLACE WITH NAME_OF_YOUR_GOOGLE_DOMAIN"
      $ SSO_URL="REPLACE WITH SSO_URL"
      $ udm portals/entry modify \
        --dn "cn=SP,cn=entry,cn=portals,cn=univention,$(ucr get ldap/base)" \
        --set link='"en_US" "'"$SSO_URL"'/realms/ucs/protocol/saml/clients/google.com?RelayState=https://www.google.com/a/'"$google_domain"'/ServiceLogin"'

To validate the setup, visit https://google.com and sign in with one of the
UCS user accounts enabled for *Google Workspace*. Also, verify the UCS portal
entry *Google Workspace login* for the |IDP| initiated single sign-on.

.. warning::

   The automatic redirect after the single sign-out doesn't work with
   :program:`Keycloak`.

.. seealso::

   `Google Workspace Connector <https://www.univention.com/products/univention-app-center/app-catalog/google-apps/>`_
      in Univention App Catalog

.. _migration-365-connector:

Microsoft 365 Connector
-----------------------

The example illustrates how to migrate the app :program:`Microsoft 365
Connector` to use :program:`Keycloak` as :term:`SAML IDP`. It assumes
that your environment meets the following requirements:

* The configuration of the app :program:`Microsoft 365 Connector` is complete
  and done.

* The |SAML| login for your *Azure Active Directory* domain works with
  :program:`SimpleSAMLphp`.

* You have a client computer with *Microsoft Windows* installed on it and a
  working internet connection on the client computer to configure |SAML| in
  *Azure Active Directory*.

* You have the *Administrator* credentials for your *Azure Active Directory*
  domain for the |SAML| service configuration.

* The UCS domain has the latest version of the app :program:`Keycloak`
  installed.

To setup :program:`Microsoft 365 Connector` for |SAML| with :program:`Keycloak`,
use the following steps:

#. Create a :term:`SAML SP`, the client, for :program:`Microsoft 365 Connector`
   in :program:`Keycloak`. Run the following commands on the UCS system that has
   :program:`Keycloak` installed:

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Create SAML client for *Microsoft 365 Connector* in *Keycloak*
      :name: migration-365-connector-create-saml-sp

      # get the saml client metadata xml from microsoft
      $ curl https://nexus.microsoftonline-p.com/federationmetadata/saml20/federationmetadata.xml > /tmp/ms.xml

      # create the client in keycloak
      $ univention-keycloak saml/sp create \
        --metadata-file /tmp/ms.xml \
        --metadata-url urn:federation:MicrosoftOnline \
        --idp-initiated-sso-url-name MicrosoftOnline \
        --name-id-format persistent

      # create a SAML nameid mapper
      $ univention-keycloak saml-client-nameid-mapper create \
        urn:federation:MicrosoftOnline \
        entryUUID \
        --mapper-nameid-format "urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:2.0:nameid-format:persistent" \
        --user-attribute entryUUID \
        --base64

#. For the configuration of the |SAML| settings of your *Azure Active Directory*
   domain you need the public certificate and the base URL of the
   :program:`Keycloak` server. Run the following commands on the UCS system that
   has :program:`Keycloak` installed:

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Retrieve public certificate and *Keycloak* base URL
      :name: migration-365-connector-keycloak-certificate

      $ univention-keycloak saml/idp/cert get --output /tmp/keycloak.cert
      $ cat /tmp/keycloak.cert

   The output of the command in
   :numref:`migration-365-connector-keycloak-certificate` is the certificate.
   Replace :samp:`{KEYCLOAK_CERTIFICATE}` in the following steps with this
   value.

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Retrieve public certificate and *Keycloak* base URL
      :name: migration-365-connector-keycloak-base-url

      $ univention-keycloak get-keycloak-base-url

   The command in :numref:`migration-365-connector-keycloak-base-url` outputs
   the base URL of your :program:`Keycloak` server. Replace :samp:`{SSO_URL}` in
   the following steps with this value.

#. To configure the |SAML| settings for the *Azure Active Directory* domain,
   copy the following code block to your *Microsoft Windows* client computer.
   Replace the values for :samp:`{SSO_URL}`, :samp:`{KEYCLOAK_CERTIFICATE}`,
   the *Azure Active Directory* domain name and credentials and run the
   script in the *Microsoft Windows* :program:`PowerShell`.

   .. code-block:: powershell
      :caption: Change *Azure Active Directory* domain authentication to use *Keycloak*
      :name: migration-365-connector-windows-change

      # CHANGE this according to your setup/environemt
      $sso_url = "replace with SSO_URL"
      $signing_cert = "replace with KEYCLOAK_CERTIFICATE"
      $domain = "YOUR AZURE DOMAIN NAME"
      $username = "YOUR AZURE DOMAIN ADMIN"
      $password = "PASSWORD OF YOUR AZURE DOMAIN ADMIN"
      $realm = "REALM OF CHOICE (usually ucs)"
      # CHANGE end

      $issuer_uri = "$sso_url/realms/$realm"
      $logon_uri = "$sso_url/realms/$realm/protocol/saml"
      $passive_logon_uri = "$sso_url/realms/$realm/protocol/saml"
      $logoff_uri = "$sso_url/realms/$realm/protocol/saml"
      $pass = ConvertTo-SecureString -String "$password" -AsPlainText -Force
      $credential = New-Object -TypeName System.Management.Automation.PSCredential -ArgumentList $username, $pass
      $o365cred = Get-Credential $credential

      Install-Module MSOnline
      Import-Module MSOnline
      Connect-MsolService -Credential $o365cred

      Set-MsolDomainAuthentication -DomainName "$domain" -Authentication Managed
      Set-MsolDomainAuthentication `
          -DomainName "$domain" `
          -FederationBrandName "UCS" `
          -Authentication Federated `
          -ActiveLogOnUri "$logon_uri" `
          -PassiveLogOnUri "$passive_logon_uri" `
          -SigningCertificate "$signing_cert" `
          -IssuerUri "$issuer_uri" `
          -LogOffUri "$logoff_uri" `
          -PreferredAuthenticationProtocol SAMLP

      Get-MsolDomain
      Pause

#. To change the link in the UCS portal entry *Microsoft 365 Login* for the
   |IDP| initiated single sign-on, run the following commands on your UCS
   *Primary Directory Node*:

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Change portal entry for *Microsoft 365 Login* to |IDP| initiated single sign-on
      :name: migration-365-connector-portal-entry

      $ SSO_URL="REPLACE WITH SSO_URL"
      $ realm="ucs"
      $ udm portals/entry modify \
        --dn "cn=office365,cn=entry,cn=portals,cn=univention,$(ucr get ldap/base)" \
        --set link='"en_US" "'"$SSO_URL"'/realms/"'"$realm"'"/protocol/saml/clients/MicrosoftOnline"'

To validate the setup, visit https://www.microsoft365.com/ and sign in with one
of the UCS user accounts enabled for *Microsoft 365*. Also, verify the UCS
portal entry *Microsoft 365 Login* for the |IDP| initiated single sign-on.

.. warning::

   The automatic redirect after the single sign-out doesn't work with
   :program:`Keycloak`.

.. _migration-365-connector-multiple-connection:

Migration of additional Azure AD connections
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is possible to configure additional Azure AD connections for single-sign on using the Microsoft 365 Connector wizard.
If multiple AD connections were configured according to :ref:`uv-manual:domain-saml-extended-configuration`, each connection
needs to be migrated individually to :program:`Keycloak`.
Since Azure AD explicitly needs different entity IDs for each connection, this entails the creation of a new |IDP| and therefore a new realm for each connection.

To create a new logical |IDP| in :program:`Keycloak`, run the following commands on your UCS :program:`Keycloak` host.

.. code-block:: console
   :caption: Create a new logical |IDP| in Keycloak
   :name: create-proxy-realm

   $ AD_CONNECTION="REPLACE WITH MICROSOFT 365 AD CONNECTION NAME"
   $ univention-keycloak proxy-realms create "$AD_CONNECTION"


Use the following call to get the certificate of your newly created |IDP|

.. code-block:: console
   :caption: Get the certificate of the newly created Realm
   :name: get-certificate-of-realm

   $ univention-keycloak saml/idp/cert get \
      --realm-id="$AD_CONNECTION" \
      --output "/tmp/keycloak-"$AD_CONNECTION".cert"
    cat /tmp/keycloak-"$AD_CONNECTION".cert

Using this certificate as :samp:`$signing_cert` and the :samp:`AD_CONNECTION` as :samp:`$realm`, follow the steps from
:ref:`migration-365-connector-windows-change` onward to update the |SAML| settings for the *Azure Active Directory* domain.

Repeat these steps for each additional configured Azure AD connection.

.. seealso::

   `Microsoft 365 Connector <https://www.univention.com/products/univention-app-center/app-catalog/microsoft365/>`_
      in Univention App Catalog

Commit message:

docs(keycloak-app): MS 365 logout does not work if --single-logout-service-url-redirect is not specified
docs: MS 365 logout does not work if --single-logout-service-url-redirect is not specified - improve paragraph

docs/keycloak-migration/migration-examples/saml.rst, after:

.. SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023-2024 Univention GmbH
..
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: AGPL-3.0-only

.. _migration-example-saml:

Services using SAML
===================

The following examples demonstrate the migration of services that use |SAML|
for authentication and :program:`SimpleSAMLphp` as |IDP| to :program:`Keycloak`
as |IDP|.

.. _portal-migration:

UCS Portal
----------

You can configure the UCS Portal to use |SAML| for authentication. For a
detailed description of how to configure the UCS Portal to use
:program:`Keycloak` as a :term:`SAML IDP`, refer to
:external+uv-keycloak-app:ref:`login-portal` in the :cite:t:`ucs-keycloak-doc`.

.. _migration-nextcloud:

Nextcloud
---------

This section is about migrating the :program:`Nextcloud` app to use
:program:`Keycloak` as :term:`SAML IDP` for the |SAML| authentication. It
assumes that your environment meets the following requirements:

* The configuration of the app :program:`Nextcloud` is complete and done.

* The |SAML| sign-in for :program:`Nextcloud` works with
  :program:`SimpleSAMLphp` as :term:`SAML IDP`.

* The UCS domain has the latest version of the app :program:`Keycloak`
  installed.

To setup :program:`Nextcloud` for |SAML| with :program:`Keycloak`, use the
following steps:

#. To create a SAML client for :program:`Nextcloud`, run the following commands
   on the UCS system that has the :program:`Keycloak` app installed. Replace
   :samp:`{NEXTCLOUD_FQDN}` with the |FQDN| of the UCS system that has
   :program:`Nextcloud` installed.

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Create SAML client for *Nextcloud* in *Keycloak*
      :name: migration-nextcloud-create-saml-client

      $ NEXTCLOUD_FQDN="REPLACE with NEXTCLOUD_FQDN"
      $ univention-keycloak saml/sp create \
        --metadata-url="https://$NEXTCLOUD_FQDN/nextcloud/apps/user_saml/saml/metadata" \
        --role-mapping-single-value

#. To obtain the :program:`Keycloak` base URL and certificate, run
   the following commands on the UCS system that has :program:`Keycloak`
   installed:

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Retrieve public certificate of *Keycloak*
      :name: migration-nextcloud-get-keycloak-certificate

      $ univention-keycloak saml/idp/cert get \
         --as-pem \
         --output "/tmp/keycloak.cert"

   The output of the command in
   :numref:`migration-nextcloud-get-keycloak-certificate` saves the certificate
   in the file :file:`/tmp/keycloak.cert`. Copy this file to the UCS system that
   has the :program:`Nextcloud` app installed.

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Retrieve public certificate and *Keycloak* base URL
      :name: migration-nextcloud-get-keycloak-base-url

      $ univention-keycloak get-keycloak-base-url

   The command in :numref:`migration-nextcloud-get-keycloak-base-url` outputs
   the base URL of your :program:`Keycloak` server. Replace :samp:`{SSO_URL}` in
   the following instruction with this value.

#. To change the |IDP| settings for :program:`Nextcloud`, run the following
   commands on the UCS system that has it installed. Copy the certificate file
   :file:`/tmp/keycloak.cert` from
   :numref:`migration-nextcloud-get-keycloak-certificate` to the UCS system with
   :program:`Nextcloud` installed and replace :samp:`{SSO_URL}`.

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Configure the :program:`Nextcloud` app to use :program:`Keycloak` as |IDP|
      :name: migration-nextcloud-saml-settings

      $ SSO_URL="REPLACE WITH SSO_URL"
      $ univention-app shell nextcloud sudo -u www-data /var/www/html/occ saml:config:set \
        --idp-x509cert="$(cat /tmp/keycloak.cert)" \
        --general-uid_mapping="uid" \
        --idp-singleLogoutService.url="$SSO_URL/realms/ucs/protocol/saml" \
        --idp-singleSignOnService.url="$SSO_URL/realms/ucs/protocol/saml" \
        --idp-entityId="$SSO_URL/realms/ucs" 1

To validate the setup, visit the sign-in page of your :program:`Nextcloud`
app and initiate a single sign-on. :program:`Nextcloud` redirects you to
:program:`Keycloak` for authentication. You can use :program:`Nextcloud` after
authentication.

.. seealso::

   `Nextcloud <https://www.univention.com/products/univention-app-center/app-catalog/nextcloud/>`_
      in Univention App Catalog

.. _migration-google-connector:

Google Workspace Connector
--------------------------

This section provides a step-by-step guide for migrating the :program:`Google
Connector` app to use :program:`Keycloak` as :term:`SAML IDP`. The migration
assumes that your environment meets the following requirements:

* The configuration of the app :program:`Google Workspace Connector` is complete
  and done.

* The |SAML| login for your *Google Workspace* works with
  :program:`SimpleSAMLphp`.

* You have the administrator credentials for your *Google Workspace Admin Console* for
  the |SAML| service configuration.

* The UCS domain has the latest version of the app :program:`Keycloak`
  installed.

To setup :program:`Google Workspace Connector` for |SAML| with
:program:`Keycloak` use the following steps:

#. Create a :term:`SAML SP`, the client, for :program:`Google Workspace
   Connector` in :program:`Keycloak`. Run the following commands on the UCS
   system that has :program:`Keycloak` installed:

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Create SAML client for *Google Workspace Connector* in *Keycloak*
      :name: migration-google-connector-create-saml-sp

      $ google_domain="REPLACE_WITH_NAME_OF_YOUR_GOOGLE_DOMAIN"
      $ univention-keycloak saml/sp create \
          --client-id google.com \
          --assertion-consumer-url-post "https://www.google.com/a/$google_domain/acs" \
          --single-logout-service-url-post "https://www.google.com/a/$google_domain/acs" \
          --idp-initiated-sso-url-name google.com \
          --name-id-format email \
          --frontchannel-logout-off
      $ univention-keycloak user-attribute-ldap-mapper \
        create univentionGoogleAppsPrimaryEmail
      $ univention-keycloak saml-client-nameid-mapper create \
        google.com \
        univentionGoogleAppsPrimaryEmail \
        --user-attribute univentionGoogleAppsPrimaryEmail \
        --mapper-nameid-format urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:1.1:nameid-format:emailAddress

#. For the configuration of the |SAML| settings of your *Google Workspace* you
   need the public certificate and the base URL of the :program:`Keycloak`
   server. Run the following commands on the UCS system that has
   :program:`Keycloak` installed:

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Retrieve public certificate and *Keycloak* base URL
      :name: migration-google-connector-keycloak-certificate

      $ univention-keycloak saml/idp/cert get --as-pem --output /tmp/keycloak.cert

   The output of the command in
   :numref:`migration-google-connector-keycloak-certificate` is the certificate.
   Copy the file :file:`/tmp/keycloak.cert` to your local client computer.

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Retrieve public certificate and *Keycloak* base URL
      :name: migration-google-connector-keycloak-base-url

      $ univention-keycloak get-keycloak-base-url

   The command in :numref:`migration-google-connector-keycloak-base-url` outputs
   the base URL of your :program:`Keycloak` server. Replace :samp:`{SSO_URL}` in
   the following instruction with this value.

#. Change the *Third-party SSO profile for your organisation* settings in the
   *Google Workspace Admin console* of your google domain.

   #. Open the URL https://admin.google.com and login with your administrator
      account.

   #. Go to :menuselection:`Security --> Authentication --> SSO with third-party IdP`.

   #. Open *Third-party SSO profile for your organisation*.

   #. Change *Sign-in page URL* to ``SSO_URL/realms/ucs/protocol/saml``.

   #. Change *Sign-out page URL* to ``SSO_URL/realms/ucs/protocol/openid-connect/logout``.

   #. To upload the :program:`Keycloak` certificate in :file:`/tmp/kc.cert`
      from :numref:`migration-google-connector-keycloak-certificate`, click
      :guilabel:`REPLACE CERTIFICATE`.

   #. To activate the settings, click :guilabel:`Save`.

#. Change the link in the UCS portal entry *Google Workspace login* for the
   |IDP| initiated single sign-on. On your UCS *Primary Directory Node* run the
   following commands:

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Change portal entry for *Google Workspace login* to |IDP| initiated single sign-on
      :name: migration-google-connector-portal-entry

      $ google_domain="REPLACE WITH NAME_OF_YOUR_GOOGLE_DOMAIN"
      $ SSO_URL="REPLACE WITH SSO_URL"
      $ udm portals/entry modify \
        --dn "cn=SP,cn=entry,cn=portals,cn=univention,$(ucr get ldap/base)" \
        --set link='"en_US" "'"$SSO_URL"'/realms/ucs/protocol/saml/clients/google.com?RelayState=https://www.google.com/a/'"$google_domain"'/ServiceLogin"'

To validate the setup, visit https://google.com and sign in with one of the
UCS user accounts enabled for *Google Workspace*. Also, verify the UCS portal
entry *Google Workspace login* for the |IDP| initiated single sign-on.

.. warning::

   The automatic redirect after the single sign-out doesn't work with
   :program:`Keycloak`.

.. seealso::

   `Google Workspace Connector <https://www.univention.com/products/univention-app-center/app-catalog/google-apps/>`_
      in Univention App Catalog

.. _migration-365-connector:

Microsoft 365 Connector
-----------------------

The example illustrates how to migrate the app :program:`Microsoft 365
Connector` to use :program:`Keycloak` as :term:`SAML IDP`. It assumes
that your environment meets the following requirements:

* The configuration of the app :program:`Microsoft 365 Connector` is complete
  and done.

* The |SAML| login for your *Azure Active Directory* domain works with
  :program:`SimpleSAMLphp`.

* You have a client computer with *Microsoft Windows* installed on it and a
  working internet connection on the client computer to configure |SAML| in
  *Azure Active Directory*.

* You have the *Administrator* credentials for your *Azure Active Directory*
  domain for the |SAML| service configuration.

* The UCS domain has the latest version of the app :program:`Keycloak`
  installed.

To setup :program:`Microsoft 365 Connector` for |SAML| with :program:`Keycloak`,
use the following steps:

#. Create a :term:`SAML SP`, the client, for :program:`Microsoft 365 Connector`
   in :program:`Keycloak`. Run the following commands on the UCS system that has
   :program:`Keycloak` installed:

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Create SAML client for *Microsoft 365 Connector* in *Keycloak*
      :name: migration-365-connector-create-saml-sp

      # get the saml client metadata xml from microsoft
      $ curl https://nexus.microsoftonline-p.com/federationmetadata/saml20/federationmetadata.xml > /tmp/ms.xml

      # create the client in keycloak
      $ univention-keycloak saml/sp create \
        --metadata-file /tmp/ms.xml \
        --metadata-url urn:federation:MicrosoftOnline \
        --idp-initiated-sso-url-name MicrosoftOnline \
        --single-logout-service-url-redirect https://login.microsoftonline.com/login.srf
        --name-id-format persistent

      # create a SAML nameid mapper
      $ univention-keycloak saml-client-nameid-mapper create \
        urn:federation:MicrosoftOnline \
        entryUUID \
        --mapper-nameid-format "urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:2.0:nameid-format:persistent" \
        --user-attribute entryUUID \
        --base64


#. For Single Logout, :program:`Microsoft 365 Connector` needs to be able to
   include Keycloak in its website. Normally, this is disallowed via the
   Content Security Policy of Keycloak (preventing arbitrary web pages from
   showing the Keycloak login form, for example). But here, we need it. So on
   each UCS system that has Keycloak installed, run the following commands:

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Allow MS 365 to include Keycloak
      :name: migration-365-connector-add-csp

      ucr set keycloak/csp/frame-ancestors=https://login.microsoftonline.com
      service apache2 reload

#. For the configuration of the |SAML| settings of your *Azure Active Directory*
   domain you need the public certificate and the base URL of the
   :program:`Keycloak` server. Run the following commands on the UCS system that
   has :program:`Keycloak` installed:

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Retrieve public certificate and *Keycloak* base URL
      :name: migration-365-connector-keycloak-certificate

      $ univention-keycloak saml/idp/cert get --output /tmp/keycloak.cert
      $ cat /tmp/keycloak.cert

   The output of the command in
   :numref:`migration-365-connector-keycloak-certificate` is the certificate.
   Replace :samp:`{KEYCLOAK_CERTIFICATE}` in the following steps with this
   value.

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Retrieve public certificate and *Keycloak* base URL
      :name: migration-365-connector-keycloak-base-url

      $ univention-keycloak get-keycloak-base-url

   The command in :numref:`migration-365-connector-keycloak-base-url` outputs
   the base URL of your :program:`Keycloak` server. Replace :samp:`{SSO_URL}` in
   the following steps with this value.

#. To configure the |SAML| settings for the *Azure Active Directory* domain,
   copy the following code block to your *Microsoft Windows* client computer.
   Replace the values for :samp:`{SSO_URL}`, :samp:`{KEYCLOAK_CERTIFICATE}`,
   the *Azure Active Directory* domain name and credentials and run the
   script in the *Microsoft Windows* :program:`PowerShell`.

   .. code-block:: powershell
      :caption: Change *Azure Active Directory* domain authentication to use *Keycloak*
      :name: migration-365-connector-windows-change

      # CHANGE this according to your setup/environemt
      $sso_url = "replace with SSO_URL"
      $signing_cert = "replace with KEYCLOAK_CERTIFICATE"
      $domain = "YOUR AZURE DOMAIN NAME"
      $username = "YOUR AZURE DOMAIN ADMIN"
      $password = "PASSWORD OF YOUR AZURE DOMAIN ADMIN"
      $realm = "REALM OF CHOICE (usually ucs)"
      # CHANGE end

      $issuer_uri = "$sso_url/realms/$realm"
      $logon_uri = "$sso_url/realms/$realm/protocol/saml"
      $passive_logon_uri = "$sso_url/realms/$realm/protocol/saml"
      $logoff_uri = "$sso_url/realms/$realm/protocol/saml"
      $pass = ConvertTo-SecureString -String "$password" -AsPlainText -Force
      $credential = New-Object -TypeName System.Management.Automation.PSCredential -ArgumentList $username, $pass
      $o365cred = Get-Credential $credential

      Install-Module MSOnline
      Import-Module MSOnline
      Connect-MsolService -Credential $o365cred

      Set-MsolDomainAuthentication -DomainName "$domain" -Authentication Managed
      Set-MsolDomainAuthentication `
          -DomainName "$domain" `
          -FederationBrandName "UCS" `
          -Authentication Federated `
          -ActiveLogOnUri "$logon_uri" `
          -PassiveLogOnUri "$passive_logon_uri" `
          -SigningCertificate "$signing_cert" `
          -IssuerUri "$issuer_uri" `
          -LogOffUri "$logoff_uri" `
          -PreferredAuthenticationProtocol SAMLP

      Get-MsolDomain
      Pause

#. To change the link in the UCS portal entry *Microsoft 365 Login* for the
   |IDP| initiated single sign-on, run the following commands on your UCS
   *Primary Directory Node*:

   .. code-block:: console
      :caption: Change portal entry for *Microsoft 365 Login* to |IDP| initiated single sign-on
      :name: migration-365-connector-portal-entry

      $ SSO_URL="REPLACE WITH SSO_URL"
      $ realm="ucs"
      $ udm portals/entry modify \
        --dn "cn=office365,cn=entry,cn=portals,cn=univention,$(ucr get ldap/base)" \
        --set link='"en_US" "'"$SSO_URL"'/realms/"'"$realm"'"/protocol/saml/clients/MicrosoftOnline"'

To validate the setup, visit https://www.microsoft365.com/ and sign in with one
of the UCS user accounts enabled for *Microsoft 365*. Also, verify the UCS
portal entry *Microsoft 365 Login* for the |IDP| initiated single sign-on.

.. warning::

   The automatic redirect after the single sign-out doesn't work with
   :program:`Keycloak`.

.. _migration-365-connector-multiple-connection:

Migration of additional Azure AD connections
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is possible to configure additional Azure AD connections for single-sign on using the Microsoft 365 Connector wizard.
If multiple AD connections were configured according to :ref:`uv-manual:domain-saml-extended-configuration`, each connection
needs to be migrated individually to :program:`Keycloak`.
Since Azure AD explicitly needs different entity IDs for each connection, this entails the creation of a new |IDP| and therefore a new realm for each connection.

To create a new logical |IDP| in :program:`Keycloak`, run the following commands on your UCS :program:`Keycloak` host.

.. code-block:: console
   :caption: Create a new logical |IDP| in Keycloak
   :name: create-proxy-realm

   $ AD_CONNECTION="REPLACE WITH MICROSOFT 365 AD CONNECTION NAME"
   $ univention-keycloak proxy-realms create "$AD_CONNECTION"


Use the following call to get the certificate of your newly created |IDP|

.. code-block:: console
   :caption: Get the certificate of the newly created Realm
   :name: get-certificate-of-realm

   $ univention-keycloak saml/idp/cert get \
      --realm-id="$AD_CONNECTION" \
      --output "/tmp/keycloak-"$AD_CONNECTION".cert"
    cat /tmp/keycloak-"$AD_CONNECTION".cert

Using this certificate as :samp:`$signing_cert` and the :samp:`AD_CONNECTION` as :samp:`$realm`, follow the steps from
:ref:`migration-365-connector-windows-change` onward to update the |SAML| settings for the *Azure Active Directory* domain.

Repeat these steps for each additional configured Azure AD connection.

.. seealso::

   `Microsoft 365 Connector <https://www.univention.com/products/univention-app-center/app-catalog/microsoft365/>`_
      in Univention App Catalog
