docs-dev/README-dev.md, before:

_[TOC]_

Some internal notes about testing/app release and test setups.

# Tests

All tests with browsers should happen in a new private browser window. This ensures that no cookies or old sessions are present.

All tests have to happen using actual hostnames with correct and verfifyable certificates. The involved services rely on and test for signed and trusted certificates.

All tests have to pass before releasing a new version of the keycloak app.


## Unit test in the container

We have unit test for the univention-ldap-mapper. These are executed during the image build.

## ucs-test-keycloak and test jobs

The core of the product test should be done in ucs-test-keycloak and our
jenkins jobs. We should try to automate as much as possible. Currently we have
jobs for (https://jenkins2022.knut.univention.de/job/UCS-5.0/job/UCS-5.0-3/view/Keycloak/)
* Login Performance
* Product Tests
  * Maria DB setup
  * Setup with two backup's
  * Update scenario
  * keycloak external FQDN

## Manuall testing

* add here what we have to test manually

# Pipelines

## image_build

Builds the keycloak image and pushes it in our local gitlabe registry.
The name of the image if `gitregistry.knut.univention.de/univention/components/keycloak-app:$NAME_OF_BRANCH`
or `gitregistry.knut.univention.de/univention/components/keycloak-app:latest` for the `main` branch.

The idea is that every MR has its own image and QA can use this
to setup an environment for testing.

The app in the test appcenter always uses the image from the `main` branch.

Before releasing a new version the image has to be transferred to our external
registry (see docker-job). In this process the image of the app is changed to
e.g. `docker.software-univention.de/keycloak-keycloak:19.0.2-ucs1`.

# Test Environments

## Manual
The latest version on the test appcenter will always point to the "main" branch
image. If you want to setup keycloak with an image of your merge request:
* `univention-app update`
* change the image name in the latest compose file in the local cache, e.g. `/var/cache/univention-appcenter/appcenter-test.software-univention.de/5.0/keycloak_20230201094428.compose`
* install the app
* if the app is already installed, run `univention-app configure keycloak`

## Configure system to use keycloak
```
# activate SSO login portal tile
udm portals/entry modify --dn "cn=login-saml,cn=entry,cn=portals,cn=univention,$(ucr get ldap/base)" --set activated=TRUE

# set umc idp server to keycloak (default is still simplesamlphp)
ucr set umc/saml/idp-server="https://ucs-sso-ng.$(ucr get domainname)/realms/ucs/protocol/saml/descriptor"
service slapd restart
```

## Via jenkins job

Or use the https://jenkins2022.knut.univention.de/job/UCS-5.0/job/UCS-5.0-3/view/Keycloak/job/UcsKeycloakEnvironment/ Jenkins job
to create a test environment (primary + keycloak and backup + keycloak). The docker image for the keycloak app can be changed via
the `KEYCLOAK_IMAGE` parameter.

To find out the IPs of your two systems, you have to consult the console output of the Jenkins job and find lines like
```sh
10:01:12 [primary] Requesting IPv4 address..
10:01:12 [primary] Requesting IPv4 address: done (MAC=52:54:00:5d:8a:29  IPv4=10.207.183.251)
[...]
10:01:15 [backup1] Requesting IPv4 address..
10:01:16 [backup1] Requesting IPv4 address: done (MAC=52:54:00:cb:d4:2b  IPv4=10.207.183.252)
```

Then add the following to your `/etc/hosts`:
```
10.207.63.20 master.ucs.test
10.207.63.21 backup.ucs.test
10.207.63.20 ucs-sso-ng.ucs.test
# 10.207.63.21 ucs-sso-ng.ucs.test # if we want to test keycloak on the backup
```

# Release of App/Documentation

The script update-appcenter-test.sh can be used to build and upload the files
from the repository for the latest test app center app version

Copy this block to the release issue and do all of them:

1. [ ] update changelog
1. [ ] run update-appcenter-test.sh
1. [ ] update docker image names (appcenter test)
1. [ ] run keycloak product tests (errata_update and release_update == public)
1. [ ] release the documentation:
   1. [ ] Check the keycloak version in the documentation links in `docs/bibliography.bib`
   1. [ ] When you release a new Keycloak version and mention it in the changelog, also add a link to the Keycloak changelog for that dedicated version. See the example for 20.0.1.
   1. [ ] Update the `DOC_TARGET_VERSION` variable in [.gitlab-ci.yml](.gitlab-ci.yml) to the new app version. The variable makes sure that the new app version has a dedicated documentation.
   1. [ ] Add an appropriate changelog entry to
 [docs/changelog.rst](docs/changelog.rst) and follow the recommendation at https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.0.0/.
   1. [ ] If documentation for a new feature or for a change is part of the regular
 text in the documentation, highlight it with the [versionadded](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/directives.html#directive-versionadded),
 [versionchanged](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/directives.html#directive-versionchanged)
 or [deprecated](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/directives.html#directive-deprecated)
   directive.
   1. [ ] After running the *production* job for the documentation in the pipeline, update the symlink `latest` the new version in the [keycloak-app directory of the docs.univention.de repository](https://git.knut.univention.de/univention/docs.univention.de/-/tree/master/keycloak-app). Try to update the symlink in the MR -> https://hutten.knut.univention.de/mediawiki/index.php/Docs/Automated_build_and_deployment#Cancel_automatic_merge_of_my_documentation_changes
1. [ ] release the app:
   * go to omar
   * run TODO
1. [ ] check released app (currently manual testing)
1. [ ] Write mail to app-announcement

After the release we need to create a new "test" version in the appcenter for
our tests.
1. [ ] create another app version in the test appcenter
1. [ ] update `Version` in `app/ini`
1. [ ] run `update-appcenter-test.sh`

# Documentation

For local documentation builds, see [Build Sphinx documents locally](https://hutten.knut.univention.de/mediawiki/index.php/Build_Sphinx_documents_locally).

## Local build

```
docker run -ti --rm -v "$PWD:/project" -w /project -u $UID --network=host --pull=always docker-registry.knut.univention.de/knut/sphinx-base:latest make -C docs/keycloak-app clean livehtml
```

# Configuration tricks

## Import SimpleSAMLPHP signing certificate pair to Keycloak
It is possible to import the signing key and certificate from `SimpleSAMLPHP` into `Keycloak`.
* Copy the private key and the certificate from the UCS *Primary Directory* (Private key: `/etc/simplesamlphp/ucs-sso.ucs test-idp-certificate.key`, Certificate: `/etc/simplesamlphp/ucs-sso.ucs.test-idp-certificate.crt`)
* Import the copied private key and the certificate to `Keycloak` via the `Keycloak Admin Console` as described in https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_admin/#adding-an-existing-keypair-and-certificate
* Make sure to *enable* and *activate* the private key and set the priority to a value greater than ``100``.
* *Disable* and *deactivate* the standard key `rsa-generated`.
* Verify that `Keycloak` uses the imported key for signatures. Check the `SAML IDP` metadata in 
`https://{$KEYCLOAK_FQDN}/realms/ucs/protocol/saml/descriptor` and verify that the `<ds:KeyName>` is the key ID (`kid`) of the imported key in the `Keycloak Admin Console`. 

## Change app settings file on-the-fly

Goal is to test new app settings on an existing UCS, by just changing the
`*.settings` file in the app cache.

```
ucr set appcenter/umc/update/always=false
ucr set update/check/cron/enabled='no'
ucr set update/check/boot/enabled='no'

edit/vi /var/cache/univention-appcenter/appcenter-test.software-univention.de/5.0/keycloak_20230705184402.settings

rm /var/cache/univention-appcenter/appcenter-test.software-univention.de/5.0/.apps.en.json
rm /var/cache/univention-appcenter/appcenter-test.software-univention.de/5.0/.apps.de.json
rm /var/cache/univention-appcenter/umc-query.json
service univention-management-console-server restart

-> login to UMC and check app settings (disable js cache)
```

Commit message:

added link to ad hoc presentation

docs-dev/README-dev.md, after:

_[TOC]_

Some internal notes about testing/app release and test setups.

# Tests

All tests with browsers should happen in a new private browser window. This ensures that no cookies or old sessions are present.

All tests have to happen using actual hostnames with correct and verfifyable certificates. The involved services rely on and test for signed and trusted certificates.

All tests have to pass before releasing a new version of the keycloak app.


## Unit test in the container

We have unit test for the univention-ldap-mapper. These are executed during the image build.

## ucs-test-keycloak and test jobs

The core of the product test should be done in ucs-test-keycloak and our
jenkins jobs. We should try to automate as much as possible. Currently we have
jobs for (https://jenkins2022.knut.univention.de/job/UCS-5.0/job/UCS-5.0-3/view/Keycloak/)
* Login Performance
* Product Tests
  * Maria DB setup
  * Setup with two backup's
  * Update scenario
  * keycloak external FQDN

## Manuall testing

* add here what we have to test manually

# Pipelines

## image_build

Builds the keycloak image and pushes it in our local gitlabe registry.
The name of the image if `gitregistry.knut.univention.de/univention/components/keycloak-app:$NAME_OF_BRANCH`
or `gitregistry.knut.univention.de/univention/components/keycloak-app:latest` for the `main` branch.

The idea is that every MR has its own image and QA can use this
to setup an environment for testing.

The app in the test appcenter always uses the image from the `main` branch.

Before releasing a new version the image has to be transferred to our external
registry (see docker-job). In this process the image of the app is changed to
e.g. `docker.software-univention.de/keycloak-keycloak:19.0.2-ucs1`.

# Test Environments

## Manual
The latest version on the test appcenter will always point to the "main" branch
image. If you want to setup keycloak with an image of your merge request:
* `univention-app update`
* change the image name in the latest compose file in the local cache, e.g. `/var/cache/univention-appcenter/appcenter-test.software-univention.de/5.0/keycloak_20230201094428.compose`
* install the app
* if the app is already installed, run `univention-app configure keycloak`

## Configure system to use keycloak
```
# activate SSO login portal tile
udm portals/entry modify --dn "cn=login-saml,cn=entry,cn=portals,cn=univention,$(ucr get ldap/base)" --set activated=TRUE

# set umc idp server to keycloak (default is still simplesamlphp)
ucr set umc/saml/idp-server="https://ucs-sso-ng.$(ucr get domainname)/realms/ucs/protocol/saml/descriptor"
service slapd restart
```

## Via jenkins job

Or use the https://jenkins2022.knut.univention.de/job/UCS-5.0/job/UCS-5.0-3/view/Keycloak/job/UcsKeycloakEnvironment/ Jenkins job
to create a test environment (primary + keycloak and backup + keycloak). The docker image for the keycloak app can be changed via
the `KEYCLOAK_IMAGE` parameter.

To find out the IPs of your two systems, you have to consult the console output of the Jenkins job and find lines like
```sh
10:01:12 [primary] Requesting IPv4 address..
10:01:12 [primary] Requesting IPv4 address: done (MAC=52:54:00:5d:8a:29  IPv4=10.207.183.251)
[...]
10:01:15 [backup1] Requesting IPv4 address..
10:01:16 [backup1] Requesting IPv4 address: done (MAC=52:54:00:cb:d4:2b  IPv4=10.207.183.252)
```

Then add the following to your `/etc/hosts`:
```
10.207.63.20 master.ucs.test
10.207.63.21 backup.ucs.test
10.207.63.20 ucs-sso-ng.ucs.test
# 10.207.63.21 ucs-sso-ng.ucs.test # if we want to test keycloak on the backup
```

# Release of App/Documentation

The script update-appcenter-test.sh can be used to build and upload the files
from the repository for the latest test app center app version

Copy this block to the release issue and do all of them:

1. [ ] update changelog
1. [ ] run update-appcenter-test.sh
1. [ ] update docker image names (appcenter test)
1. [ ] run keycloak product tests (errata_update and release_update == public)
1. [ ] release the documentation:
   1. [ ] Check the keycloak version in the documentation links in `docs/bibliography.bib`
   1. [ ] When you release a new Keycloak version and mention it in the changelog, also add a link to the Keycloak changelog for that dedicated version. See the example for 20.0.1.
   1. [ ] Update the `DOC_TARGET_VERSION` variable in [.gitlab-ci.yml](.gitlab-ci.yml) to the new app version. The variable makes sure that the new app version has a dedicated documentation.
   1. [ ] Add an appropriate changelog entry to
 [docs/changelog.rst](docs/changelog.rst) and follow the recommendation at https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.0.0/.
   1. [ ] If documentation for a new feature or for a change is part of the regular
 text in the documentation, highlight it with the [versionadded](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/directives.html#directive-versionadded),
 [versionchanged](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/directives.html#directive-versionchanged)
 or [deprecated](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/directives.html#directive-deprecated)
   directive.
   1. [ ] After running the *production* job for the documentation in the pipeline, update the symlink `latest` the new version in the [keycloak-app directory of the docs.univention.de repository](https://git.knut.univention.de/univention/docs.univention.de/-/tree/master/keycloak-app). Try to update the symlink in the MR -> https://hutten.knut.univention.de/mediawiki/index.php/Docs/Automated_build_and_deployment#Cancel_automatic_merge_of_my_documentation_changes
1. [ ] release the app:
   * go to omar
   * run TODO
1. [ ] check released app (currently manual testing)
1. [ ] Write mail to app-announcement

After the release we need to create a new "test" version in the appcenter for
our tests.
1. [ ] create another app version in the test appcenter
1. [ ] update `Version` in `app/ini`
1. [ ] run `update-appcenter-test.sh`

# Documentation

For local documentation builds, see [Build Sphinx documents locally](https://hutten.knut.univention.de/mediawiki/index.php/Build_Sphinx_documents_locally).

## Local build

```
docker run -ti --rm -v "$PWD:/project" -w /project -u $UID --network=host --pull=always docker-registry.knut.univention.de/knut/sphinx-base:latest make -C docs/keycloak-app clean livehtml
```

# AD hoc

* Presentation `Keycloak and SPI extensions in Phoenix ` from Ferenc Géczi on
  https://hutten.knut.univention.de/mediawiki/index.php/Uttuusch

# Configuration tricks

## Import SimpleSAMLPHP signing certificate pair to Keycloak
It is possible to import the signing key and certificate from `SimpleSAMLPHP` into `Keycloak`.
* Copy the private key and the certificate from the UCS *Primary Directory* (Private key: `/etc/simplesamlphp/ucs-sso.ucs test-idp-certificate.key`, Certificate: `/etc/simplesamlphp/ucs-sso.ucs.test-idp-certificate.crt`)
* Import the copied private key and the certificate to `Keycloak` via the `Keycloak Admin Console` as described in https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_admin/#adding-an-existing-keypair-and-certificate
* Make sure to *enable* and *activate* the private key and set the priority to a value greater than ``100``.
* *Disable* and *deactivate* the standard key `rsa-generated`.
* Verify that `Keycloak` uses the imported key for signatures. Check the `SAML IDP` metadata in 
`https://{$KEYCLOAK_FQDN}/realms/ucs/protocol/saml/descriptor` and verify that the `<ds:KeyName>` is the key ID (`kid`) of the imported key in the `Keycloak Admin Console`. 

## Change app settings file on-the-fly

Goal is to test new app settings on an existing UCS, by just changing the
`*.settings` file in the app cache.

```
ucr set appcenter/umc/update/always=false
ucr set update/check/cron/enabled='no'
ucr set update/check/boot/enabled='no'

edit/vi /var/cache/univention-appcenter/appcenter-test.software-univention.de/5.0/keycloak_20230705184402.settings

rm /var/cache/univention-appcenter/appcenter-test.software-univention.de/5.0/.apps.en.json
rm /var/cache/univention-appcenter/appcenter-test.software-univention.de/5.0/.apps.de.json
rm /var/cache/univention-appcenter/umc-query.json
service univention-management-console-server restart

-> login to UMC and check app settings (disable js cache)
```
