docs/keycloak-app/database.rst, before:

.. SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022-2024 Univention GmbH
..
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: AGPL-3.0-only

.. _app-database:

**********************
Database configuration
**********************

:program:`Keycloak` uses an external database to store configurations and settings.
By default, the :program:`Keycloak` app installs and configures a :program:`PostgreSQL` database.
In case you want to use your own database backend,
you can change the database settings for :program:`Keycloak` prior or after the app installation.

.. _app-database-default:

Default database
================

The :program:`Keycloak` app installation procedure
automatically installs and configures the :program:`PostgreSQL` database
during the initial installation of the app in the UCS domain.
:program:`Keycloak` uses this database for all additional installations of the app in the UCS domain.
The default database doesn't provide replication or any kind of failover.

However, it's not mandatory to use the default :program:`PostgreSQL` database instance.
Administrators may decide to use another one, for example,
if there is a need to use an already existing or clustered database.

.. _app-database-custom:

Custom database
===============

:program:`Keycloak` supports a wide range of different databases as backend.
For detailed information,
see `Supported databases <https://www.keycloak.org/server/db>`_
in :cite:t:`keycloak-db`.

.. note::

   On the contrary to the official :program:`Keycloak` container image,
   the custom image that the :program:`Keycloak` App provides,
   doesn't contain the drivers that support an Oracle Database.
   Using an Oracle Database as a backend for :program:`Keycloak`
   isn't supported.

The :program:`Keycloak` app provides app settings
for the configuration of the database backend.
For the available settings, see the :ref:`app-settings`
section.

.. important::

   Changing these settings doesn't affect the database itself, no matter if you
   use the command line tools or the *App Center*. The database settings only
   tell :program:`Keycloak` where and how to connect to the database. Ensure
   that you first perform the needed changes on the database itself.

.. _app-database-change-before:

Changing the database configuration
===================================

The following sections explain how to change the database settings. The example
uses the :program:`MariaDB` database and the following assumptions:

* The database for Keycloak exists.

* The :program:`Keycloak` server can connect to the database.

* A user account with the appropriate permissions for the database exists.

.. note::

   The database user needs the following minimum privileges to work in a single
   machine setup. Use the `GRANT command <mariadb-grant_>`_:

   .. code-block:: sql

      GRANT SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, CREATE, ALTER, REFERENCES, INDEX, DROP
      ON `<database>`.* TO `<user>`@`<host>`;

.. _app-database-change-before-installation:

Initial installation
--------------------

This section explains how to setup the :program:`Keycloak` app to use a
different database, such as :program:`MariaDB` in this example, during the
initial and first installation of the :program:`Keycloak` app in the UCS domain.

To specify an existing MariaDB database during the initial installation, you can
either run the following installation command from the command line:

.. code-block:: console
   :caption: Install Keycloak with alternative database settings

   $ univention-app install keycloak --set \
       kc/db/url="jdbc:mariadb://database-server:3306/database-name" \
       kc/db/password="database-password" \
       kc/db/username="database-username"

Or alternatively, you can set the corresponding app settings
:envvar:`kc/db/url`, :envvar:`kc/db/password` and :envvar:`kc/db/username`
during the installation in the *Univention App Center*.

Additional installations of the :program:`Keycloak` app automatically use
these database settings without any further database configuration.

.. _app-database-change-after-installation:

After initial installation
--------------------------

After you completed the app installation in the UCS domain, :program:`Keycloak`
stores the database settings in a domain wide settings object. Subsequent
installations of the :program:`Keycloak` app use these settings, regardless of
the database settings during the installation.

.. warning::

   Changing the database settings after the installations means loosing every
   existing configuration settings and session.

   You have to manually backup :program:`Keycloak` before and restore the
   settings after changing the database backend. For more information, see
   :ref:`backup-and-restore`.

To change the database settings for existing :program:`Keycloak` instances you
have to use the following steps:

#. Change the domain wide database settings with the following command on one of
   the UCS systems that has :program:`Keycloak` installed:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ univention-keycloak domain-config \
        --set username="database-username" \
        --set uri="jdbc:mariadb://database-server:3306/database-name" \
        --set password="database-password" \
        --set driver="org.mariadb.jdbc.Driver" \
        --set ping_datatype="VARBINARY(255)"

#. Re-configure one of the :program:`Keycloak` instances and verify that it works:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ univention-app configure keycloak

#. Re-configure the rest of the :program:`Keycloak` instances.

Commit message:

Issue univention/components/keycloak-app#236: Add hints for high availability and failover
The necessary information is part of the product documentation for the
mentioned databases. However, I don't add the links, because it
increases the maintenance effort for keeping up the links to the
matching version of the databases.

Issue univention/components/keycloak-app#236

docs/keycloak-app/database.rst, after:

.. SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022-2024 Univention GmbH
..
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: AGPL-3.0-only

.. _app-database:

**********************
Database configuration
**********************

:program:`Keycloak` uses an external database to store configurations and settings.
By default, the :program:`Keycloak` app installs and configures a :program:`PostgreSQL` database.
In case you want to use your own database backend,
you can change the database settings for :program:`Keycloak` prior or after the app installation.

.. _app-database-default:

Default database
================

The :program:`Keycloak` app installation procedure
automatically installs and configures the :program:`PostgreSQL` database
during the initial installation of the app in the UCS domain.
:program:`Keycloak` uses this database for all additional installations of the app in the UCS domain.
The default :program:`PostgreSQL` database on UCS
doesn't configure high availability, load balancing, and replication.

However, it's not mandatory to use the default :program:`PostgreSQL` database instance.
Administrators may decide to use another one, for example,
if there is a need to use an already existing or clustered database.

.. tip::
   If you need database replication and failover,
   you must use a database cluster setup.
   Then, you configure the database connection
   in the :program:`Keycloak` app,
   as described in :ref:`app-database-change-before`,
   to use the database cluster instead of the local single database instance.

   Examples:
      For :program:`PostgreSQL` you need to set up your own database cluster
      and cover the topics high availability, load balancing, and replication.
      Describing this setup is beyond the scope of this document.

      For :program:`MariaDB` you need to set up a *MariaDB Galera Cluster*.
      Describing this setup is beyond the scope of this document.

.. _app-database-custom:

Custom database
===============

:program:`Keycloak` supports a wide range of different databases as backend.
For detailed information,
see `Supported databases <https://www.keycloak.org/server/db>`_
in :cite:t:`keycloak-db`.

.. note::

   On the contrary to the official :program:`Keycloak` container image,
   the custom image that the :program:`Keycloak` App provides,
   doesn't contain the drivers that support an Oracle Database.
   Using an Oracle Database as a backend for :program:`Keycloak`
   isn't supported.

The :program:`Keycloak` app provides app settings
for the configuration of the database backend.
For the available settings, see the :ref:`app-settings`
section.

.. important::

   Changing these settings doesn't affect the database itself, no matter if you
   use the command line tools or the *App Center*. The database settings only
   tell :program:`Keycloak` where and how to connect to the database. Ensure
   that you first perform the needed changes on the database itself.

.. _app-database-change-before:

Changing the database configuration
===================================

The following sections explain how to change the database settings. The example
uses the :program:`MariaDB` database and the following assumptions:

* The database for Keycloak exists.

* The :program:`Keycloak` server can connect to the database.

* A user account with the appropriate permissions for the database exists.

.. note::

   The database user needs the following minimum privileges to work in a single
   machine setup. Use the `GRANT command <mariadb-grant_>`_:

   .. code-block:: sql

      GRANT SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, CREATE, ALTER, REFERENCES, INDEX, DROP
      ON `<database>`.* TO `<user>`@`<host>`;

.. _app-database-change-before-installation:

Initial installation
--------------------

This section explains how to setup the :program:`Keycloak` app to use a
different database, such as :program:`MariaDB` in this example, during the
initial and first installation of the :program:`Keycloak` app in the UCS domain.

To specify an existing MariaDB database during the initial installation, you can
either run the following installation command from the command line:

.. code-block:: console
   :caption: Install Keycloak with alternative database settings

   $ univention-app install keycloak --set \
       kc/db/url="jdbc:mariadb://database-server:3306/database-name" \
       kc/db/password="database-password" \
       kc/db/username="database-username"

Or alternatively, you can set the corresponding app settings
:envvar:`kc/db/url`, :envvar:`kc/db/password` and :envvar:`kc/db/username`
during the installation in the *Univention App Center*.

Additional installations of the :program:`Keycloak` app automatically use
these database settings without any further database configuration.

.. _app-database-change-after-installation:

After initial installation
--------------------------

After you completed the app installation in the UCS domain, :program:`Keycloak`
stores the database settings in a domain wide settings object. Subsequent
installations of the :program:`Keycloak` app use these settings, regardless of
the database settings during the installation.

.. warning::

   Changing the database settings after the installations means loosing every
   existing configuration settings and session.

   You have to manually backup :program:`Keycloak` before and restore the
   settings after changing the database backend. For more information, see
   :ref:`backup-and-restore`.

To change the database settings for existing :program:`Keycloak` instances you
have to use the following steps:

#. Change the domain wide database settings with the following command on one of
   the UCS systems that has :program:`Keycloak` installed:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ univention-keycloak domain-config \
        --set username="database-username" \
        --set uri="jdbc:mariadb://database-server:3306/database-name" \
        --set password="database-password" \
        --set driver="org.mariadb.jdbc.Driver" \
        --set ping_datatype="VARBINARY(255)"

#. Re-configure one of the :program:`Keycloak` instances and verify that it works:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ univention-app configure keycloak

#. Re-configure the rest of the :program:`Keycloak` instances.
