docs/keycloak-migration/finish-and-update.rst, before:

.. SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023 Univention GmbH
..
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: AGPL-3.0-only

.. _update-to-ucs-5.2:

***********************************
Prepare for the update to |UCS| 5.2
***********************************

This section explains the necessary steps to prepare your domain for the
update to |UCS| 5.2. Follow these steps only after

* you migrated all services that use single sign-on for authentication to
  use :program:`Keycloak` as |IDP|,

* or you are absolutely sure no service uses :program:`SimpleSAMLphp`
  or :program:`Kopano Konnect` as |IDP| for single sign-on authentication.

|UCS| before version 5.2 stored all the :program:`SimpleSAMLphp` and
:program:`Kopano Konnect` client configurations as |UDM| modules
``saml/serviceprovider`` and ``oidc/rpservice``. The update to 5.2 blocks
until all these objects are removed.

.. warning::

   After removing these client objects, single sign-on with
   :program:`SimpleSAMLphp` or :program:`Kopano Konnect` does no longer work.

To prepare your domain for the update to |UCS| 5.2, run the following command on
your UCS :ref:`Primary Directory Node <domain-ldap-primary-directory-node>` to
backup all |IDP| client object settings and subsequently remove them:

.. code-block:: console
   :caption: Remove single sign-on client objects from UDM
   :name: remove-sso-clients

   $ univention-keycloak-migration-status --delete

Commit message:

doc(migration-guide): Rename to exact name of OpenID Connect Provider app
The App Center doesn't know an app called "Kopano Konnect". This causes
confusion for administrators looking in the App Center for that app
name. The correct app name is "OpenID Connect Provider".

To reduce the naming confusing, this commit changes "Kopano Connect" to
"OpenID Connect Provider".

docs/keycloak-migration/finish-and-update.rst, after:

.. SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023 Univention GmbH
..
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: AGPL-3.0-only

.. _update-to-ucs-5.2:

***********************************
Prepare for the update to |UCS| 5.2
***********************************

This section explains the necessary steps to prepare your domain for the
update to |UCS| 5.2. Follow these steps only after

* you migrated all services that use single sign-on for authentication to
  use :program:`Keycloak` as |IDP|,

* or you are absolutely sure no service uses :program:`SimpleSAMLphp`
  or :program:`OpenID Connect Provider` as |IDP| for single sign-on authentication.

|UCS| before version 5.2 stored all the :program:`SimpleSAMLphp` and
:program:`OpenID Connect Provider` client configurations as |UDM| modules
``saml/serviceprovider`` and ``oidc/rpservice``. The update to 5.2 blocks
until all these objects are removed.

.. warning::

   After removing these client objects, single sign-on with
   :program:`SimpleSAMLphp` or :program:`OpenID Connect Provider` does no longer work.

To prepare your domain for the update to |UCS| 5.2, run the following command on
your UCS :ref:`Primary Directory Node <domain-ldap-primary-directory-node>` to
backup all |IDP| client object settings and subsequently remove them:

.. code-block:: console
   :caption: Remove single sign-on client objects from UDM
   :name: remove-sso-clients

   $ univention-keycloak-migration-status --delete
