docs/keycloak-migration/index.rst, before:

.. SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023 Univention GmbH
..
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: AGPL-3.0-only

.. _doc-entry:

#########################################################
Migration guide: SimpleSAMLphp/Kopano Konnect to Keycloak
#########################################################

This documentation is for system administrators who already operate |UCS| 5.0
and explains the required steps for the migration from the single sign-on
identity provider apps :program:`SimpleSAMLphp` (SAML) and
:program:`Kopano Konnect` (OIDC) to the app :program:`Keycloak`.

*******************
Notes about UCS 5.2
*******************

Starting with |UCS| 5.2 the :program:`Keycloak` app replaces
:program:`SimpleSAMLphp` and the :program:`Kopano Konnect` app as the default
identity providers in |UCS|. The reason for this change is that
:program:`Keycloak` has many advantages in terms of features, configurability,
and maintainability over the alternatives, for example Keycloak provides OIDC
and SAML endpoints in one component.


.. warning::

   Migration from :program:`SimpleSAMLphp` to :program:`Keycloak` is mandatory
   before upgrading from |UCS| 5.0 to |UCS| 5.2. :program:`SimpleSAMLphp` and
   :program:`Kopano Konnect` are deprecated and will be removed in |UCS| 5.2.

If you use single sign-on for authentication in your |UCS| domain, read this
document, migrate all services to use :program:`Keycloak` as |IDP| and complete
the migration with the steps in :ref:`update-to-ucs-5.2`.

If you are absolutely sure that single sign-on for authentication is not used
in your |UCS| domain, you can skip the migration part and just prepare your
domain for the update to |UCS| 5.2, following the steps in
:ref:`update-to-ucs-5.2`.

*******************
About this document
*******************

This document covers the following topics:

#. :ref:`limitations`
#. :ref:`migration-procedure`
#. :ref:`migration-examples`
#. :ref:`troubleshooting`
#. :ref:`update-to-ucs-5.2`

This documentation doesn't cover the following topics:

* Detailed information about the usage of the :program:`Keycloak` app,
  see :cite:t:`ucs-keycloak-doc`
* Usage of |UCS|, see :cite:t:`ucs-manual`.

To understand this documentation, you need to know the following concepts and
tasks:

* Use and navigate in a remote shell on Debian GNU/Linux derivative Linux
  distributions like |UCS|. For more information, see `Shell and Basic Commands
  <deb-admin-handbook-shell_>`_ from *The Debian Administrator's Handbook*,
  :cite:t:`deb-admin-handbook-shell`.

* :ref:`app-installation` and :ref:`app-configuration` of the app
  :program:`Keycloak` as described in :cite:t:`ucs-keycloak-doc`.

* Know the concepts of SAML (`Security Assertion Markup Language <w-saml_>`_)
  and OIDC (`OpenID Connect <w-openid-connect_>`_) and the differences between
  the two standards.

Your feedback is welcome and highly appreciated. If you have comments,
suggestions, or criticism, please `send your feedback
<https://www.univention.com/feedback/?keycloak-migration=generic>`_ for document
improvement.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :numbered:
   :hidden:

   limitations
   migration-procedure/index
   migration-examples/index
   troubleshooting
   finish-and-update
   bibliography

Commit message:

doc(migration-guide): Rename to exact name of OpenID Connect Provider app
The App Center doesn't know an app called "Kopano Konnect". This causes
confusion for administrators looking in the App Center for that app
name. The correct app name is "OpenID Connect Provider".

To reduce the naming confusing, this commit changes "Kopano Connect" to
"OpenID Connect Provider".

docs/keycloak-migration/index.rst, after:

.. SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023 Univention GmbH
..
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: AGPL-3.0-only

.. _doc-entry:

##################################################################
Migration guide: SimpleSAMLphp/OpenID Connect Provider to Keycloak
##################################################################

This documentation is for system administrators
who already operate |UCS| 5.0
and explains the required steps for the migration
from the single sign-on identity provider apps
:program:`SimpleSAMLphp` (SAML)
and :program:`OpenID Connect Provider` to the app :program:`Keycloak`.
The app :program:`OpenID Connect Provider` uses
:program:`Kopano Konnect` to provide OpenID Connect capability to |UCS|.

*******************
Notes about UCS 5.2
*******************

Starting with |UCS| 5.2
the :program:`Keycloak` app replaces the apps
:program:`SimpleSAMLphp` and :program:`OpenID Connect Provider`
as the default identity providers in |UCS|.
The reason for this change is
that :program:`Keycloak` has many advantages in terms of features,
configurability, and maintainability over the alternatives,
for example, Keycloak provides OIDC and SAML endpoints in one component.

.. warning::

   Migration from :program:`SimpleSAMLphp` to :program:`Keycloak` is mandatory
   before upgrading from |UCS| 5.0 to |UCS| 5.2. :program:`SimpleSAMLphp` and
   :program:`OpenID Connect Provider` are deprecated and will be removed in |UCS| 5.2.

If you use single sign-on for authentication in your |UCS| domain, read this
document, migrate all services to use :program:`Keycloak` as |IDP| and complete
the migration with the steps in :ref:`update-to-ucs-5.2`.

If you are absolutely sure that single sign-on for authentication isn't used
in your |UCS| domain, you can skip the migration part and just prepare your
domain for the update to |UCS| 5.2, following the steps in
:ref:`update-to-ucs-5.2`.

*******************
About this document
*******************

This document covers the following topics:

#. :ref:`limitations`
#. :ref:`migration-procedure`
#. :ref:`migration-examples`
#. :ref:`troubleshooting`
#. :ref:`update-to-ucs-5.2`

This documentation doesn't cover the following topics:

* Detailed information about the usage of the :program:`Keycloak` app,
  see :cite:t:`ucs-keycloak-doc`
* Usage of |UCS|, see :cite:t:`ucs-manual`.

To understand this documentation, you need to know the following concepts and
tasks:

* Use and navigate in a remote shell on Debian GNU/Linux derivative Linux
  distributions like |UCS|. For more information, see `Shell and Basic Commands
  <deb-admin-handbook-shell_>`_ from *The Debian Administrator's Handbook*,
  :cite:t:`deb-admin-handbook-shell`.

* :ref:`app-installation` and :ref:`app-configuration` of the app
  :program:`Keycloak` as described in :cite:t:`ucs-keycloak-doc`.

* Know the concepts of SAML (`Security Assertion Markup Language <w-saml_>`_)
  and OIDC (`OpenID Connect <w-openid-connect_>`_) and the differences between
  the two standards.

Your feedback is welcome and highly appreciated. If you have comments,
suggestions, or criticism, please `send your feedback
<https://www.univention.com/feedback/?keycloak-migration=generic>`_ for document
improvement.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :numbered:
   :hidden:

   limitations
   migration-procedure/index
   migration-examples/index
   troubleshooting
   finish-and-update
   bibliography
